Network Packet Analyzer
I. Project Overview

The Network Packet Analyzer is a Python-based cybersecurity tool developed to capture and analyze live network packets.
It extracts essential packet information such as source and destination IP addresses, protocol type, port numbers, payload size, and timestamps.

This project is developed strictly for educational and ethical purposes as part of an internship task.

II. Objectives

1.To understand how data is transmitted over a network in the form of packets
2.To analyze packet headers and protocol information
3.To implement a basic packet sniffing mechanism using Python
4.To practice ethical network monitoring techniques

III. Features Implemented
1.Live network packet capture
2.Network interface detection
3.Source and destination IP address identification
4.Protocol identification (TCP, UDP, ICMP)
5.Protocol-based packet filtering
6.Source and destination port number display
7.ICMP packet (Ping) detection
8.Payload size calculation
9.Suspicious packet size alert mechanism
10.Packet logging to a text file
11.Timestamp logging for each packet
12.Packet count tracking

IV. Technologies Used

1.Programming Language: Python 3
2.Packet Analysis Library: Scapy
3.Operating System: Windows
4.Packet Capture Driver: Npcap

V. Prerequisites

Before running the project, ensure the following are installed:
1.Python 3.8 or higher
2.Scapy library
3.Npcap (installed in WinPcap-compatible mode)
4.Administrator privileges

Install Scapy:
pip install scapy

VI. How to Run the Project

1.Clone or download the repository
2.Open VS Code or Command Prompt as Administrator
3.Navigate to the project directory
4.Run the program using the command:

python packet.py

5.Generate network traffic by:
  5.1 Opening a web browser
  5.2 Visiting any website
  5.3 Running ping -4 google.com

VII. Sample Output
Packet #5
Time: 2026-01-18 15:05:30
Source IP: 10.60.172.210
Destination IP: 10.60.172.87
Protocol: UDP
Source Port: 56842
Destination Port: 53
Payload Size: 52 bytes
-------------------------------------------------------

VIII. Ethical Considerations

This tool is developed only for educational purposes.
The user must have proper authorization before monitoring any network.

The program:

1.Avoids capturing sensitive payload data
2.Limits packet capture count
3.Displays ethical usage warnings

Unauthorized use of packet sniffing tools is strictly discouraged.

IX. Limitations

1.The current implementation focuses on IPv4 packets
2.IPv6 (ICMPv6) packets are not captured
3.Payload content is not displayed to maintain privacy

X. Future Enhancements

1.IPv6 packet and ICMPv6 support
2.GUI-based packet analyzer
3.CSV-based logging
4.Advanced intrusion detection alerts

XI. Author

Hema Harini
Cybersecurity Intern

XII. Disclaimer

This project is intended only for academic and ethical learning purposes.
The author is not responsible for any misuse of this tool.
